Problem Set 4
Summer 2010

Piecewise-Linear Topology
Jim Fowler

A new equivalence. Problem Set 4 introduces simple homotopy equivalence, an equivalence relation between simplicial complexes which is coarser than simplicial isomorphism or PL homeomorphism; Please write down answers to problems labeled with •. Deﬁnition. Let K be a complex, and σ ∈ K a simplex. Call σ a principal simplex if the only simplex containing σ is σ itself (i.e., it isn’t contained in a larger simplex). For a simplex σ ∈ K, call τ < σ a free face of σ if the only simplexes containing τ are τ and σ. If L and K = L ⊔ {σ, τ } are simplicial complexes, and σ is a principal simplex of K, and τ is a free face of σ, then L is an elementary simplicial collapse of K. If K1 , K2 , . . . , Kn are complexes, with Ki+1 an elementary simplicial collapse of Ki , then Kn is a simplicial collapse of K1 , denoted K1 ↘ Kn ; conversely, K1 a simplicial expansion of Kn , denoted K n ↗ K1 . Finally, K is simple homotopy equivalent to L if you can reach transform K into L via a sequence of • PL homeomorphisms, • simplicial collapses, • simplicial expansions. In this case, we write K

L.

• Problem 1. Find two manifolds with boundary which are simple homotopy equivalent, but not PL homeomorphic.
Deﬁnition. Let K be a complex. If K ↘ ∆0 , i.e., it collapses to a point, then we call the complex collapsible.

• Problem 2. Prove that the complex ∆n is collapsible.
Problem 3. Construct inﬁnitely many collapsible complexes, no two of which are PL homeomorphic.

Problem 4. Show that Bing’s House with Two Rooms, as shown on the right, is simple homotopy equivalent to a point, but is not collapsible.

Problem 5. Show that the dunce cap is not collapsible, but is simple homotopy equivalent to a point; the dunce cap is constructed by starting with triangle ABC, and identifying edge AB with edge AC, and also with edge CB.

• Problem 6. Is χ(K ) = χ( L) if K and L are simple homotopy equivalent?
Deﬁnition. The cone of a complex K (written CK) is K ∗ ∆0 , i.e., the join of K with a point.

• Problem 7. Show that the cone of any complex is collapsible.
Deﬁnition. The suspension of a complex K (written SK) is K ∗ S0 , where S0 = ∂∆1 , that is, two disjoint points. In this notation, SSn ∼ Sn+1 . =

• Problem 8. Find a complex K so that SK

K.

Problem 9. Is K (non-)collapsible precisely when SK is (non-)collapsible? Problem 10. Is the join of collapsible complexes necessarily collapsible? Problem 11. Is join well-deﬁned on simple homotopy types? That is, if K L L′ , is it then the case that K ∗ L K ′ ∗ L′ ?

K ′ and

3-manifolds
Problem 12. Prove that there exist two distinct 3-manifolds. Problem 13. Find a copy of T 2 #T 2 #T 2 inside T 3 , which divides T 3 into two components, homeomorphic to each other. Problem 14. Let f : T 2 → T 2 be a homeomorphism, and use f to glue together two copies of S1 × ∆2 . Describe two distinct 3-manifolds that can result from this procedure (though it might be hard to prove that they are distinct, given what we know thus far!).

Connected sum
Problem 15. Given n-manifolds M and N , compute χ( M#N ) in terms of χ( M ) and χ( N ).

• Problem 16. Show that T 2 and T 2 #T 2 are not PL homeomorphic.
Problem 17. Let K be the Klein bottle; determine whether K#K and T 2 #K are PL homeomorphic. Problem 18 (Hard). Suppose that M#N = M. Does it follow that N is a sphere?

Orientability
• Problem 19. Construct an orientation on Sn .
Problem 20. Does there exist a connected 2-manifold M2 with

χ( M ) > 0 and w1 ( M ) = 1.
Problem 21. Give an example of a non-orientable 3-manifold M3 . Problem 22. Let K be the Klein bottle; is there an orientation on the 4-manifold K × K? Problem 23. Consider how w1 ( M × N ) might relate to w1 ( M ) and w1 ( N ).

Products
Problem 24. Show that if M is a manifold, then M × S1 is a manifold. What does M × S1 even mean? Problem 25. Compute χ(K × L) in terms of χ(K ) and χ( L). Problem 26. Show that there exist inﬁnitely many distinct 4-manifolds.

