Lecture 1: Welcome, parametric equations
Math 195 Section 91 Monday June 22, 2009
Goal: Sections 11.1, and 11.2.

Welcome to the course Syllabus Goal
Diﬀerentiation as a “wiggle” Machine with n inputs and k outputs—wiggle one input. Goal: Expand both our intuition and our technical skill from one variable to many variables. Stop using your calculator. You are Neo, and when you are good enough... The book does a lot of great examples which are more complicated than what I intend to do in class. You should look at these examples. You should read the book. In contrast, I will tell you the secrets that this book—that every book—leaves out.

Objects
Review: functions—what is a function? We often broad the class of objects under consideration (history of “number”) Introduce section 11.1: Parametric curve (i.e., curve deﬁnd using a parameter) example: x(t) = 3t and y(t) = 4t—remark the goal of calculus to reduce evertying to a straight line. example: x(t) = t2 and y(t) = t3 —what happens at 0? example: x(t) = sin t and y(t) = cos t—why is that a circle? concerned more with patterns, with qualitative data, than quantative results. A common problem is the following: you have a parametric equation, and you must ﬁnd a cartesian equation for part of the curve. Better terminology than the books: reparameterization—sweep out the same curve, but in a diﬀerent amount of time

1

Thinking about parameters
Think about the parameter as looking down at a 3-dimensional object from above... sometimes we might have more than one parameter: example: x(u, t) = u · sin t and y(u, t) = u · cos t—a family of circles! there’s a great deal of ﬂexibility about how you explore these objects

Calculus on curves
take derivatives at a point elliptic curve x(t) = t2 and y(t) = t3 − 3t. graph through (0, 0) and (3, 0) and (1, 2) and (1, −2). dy/dx = (dy/dt)/(dx/dt). Why? calculate derivatives (and second derivatives) elsewhere to ﬁnish the sketch better than using a calculator—we’re not just sampling points! We’re using calculus to understand the qualitative features of a graph what is the deriative at 0 when x(t) = t2 and y(t) = t3 ?

arc length
under suitable conditions L=
a b

x (t)2 + y (t)2 dt

confess: i could never remember this formula challenge: try to ﬁnd situations where the formula is incorrect. this is the “understand biology by killing things” or “learn how cars work by removing parts until the car stops working” method why should this be true? example... can we calculate the circumference of a circle?

2

