Syllabus

Math 133, Section 22

Spring 2006

Welcome to Math 133, the third quarter of a year-long Calculus sequence. This course emphasizes three topics: transcendental functions, integration techniques, and inﬁnite series.

Resources
We present ﬁve resources to help you to learn Calculus.

Oﬃce Hours
If you have questions, want to work through problems, or just talk about mathematics, I invite you to come to my oﬃce hours. Name: Oﬃce: Phone: Email: Jim Fowler Math/Stat 102 773–573–5659 jim@uchicago.edu Oﬃce Hours: Tuesday 4:00–6:00p.m. Thursday 5:00–7:00p.m. or by appointment

Please email me with any concerns you have; the success of this course depends on open communication.

Textbook
Our text is Calculus by Verberg, Purcell, and Bigdon (8th Edition).

Website
The website is on chalk; we will post homework assignments and take-home quizzes.

Lectures
We meet Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays, 9:30–10:20a.m. in Ryerson 358 for an interactive lecture.

Problem Session
You meet with your tutor on Tuesdays and Thursdays, 9:00–10:20a.m. for an interactive problem session. The tutors, in alphabetical order, are: • Danny Rosenthal (danny@uchicago.edu) in Wiebolt 111, • Sara Rezvi (arsinoe@uchicago.edu) in Harper 125, • Steve Balady (sbalady@uchicago.edu) in Wiebolt 102. If for any reason you want to switch to a diﬀerent problem session, contact Jim Fowler.

Requirements
There are one thousand points possible in this course, broken down as follows: Daily homework (95 points). Homework is assigned Mondays and Wednesdays, and due the following class period. You should work on the homework problems together, but you must write up your solutions independently. 2 midterms (200 points each). The midterms are in class. The ﬁrst midterm is on Friday, April 21, at the end of week 4; the second midterm is on Friday, May 19, at the end of week 8. 7 quizzes (15 points each). Short take-home quizzes are assigned Fridays without an inclass exam, and due the following Monday. 1 ﬁnal exam (400 points). The ﬁnal exam will be held 8:00–10:00a.m. on Monday, June 5, 2006.

Department Policy on Final Exams
It is the policy of the Department of Mathematics that the following rules apply to ﬁnal exams in all undergraduate mathematics courses: 1. The ﬁnal exam must occur at the time and place designated on the College Final Exam Schedule. In particular, no ﬁnal examinations may be given during the tenth week of the quarter, except in the case of graduating seniors. 2. Any student who wishes to depart from the scheduled ﬁnal exam time for the course must receive permission from Paul Sally (oﬃce is Ryerson 350, phone is 2-7388, email is sally@math.uchicago.edu). Instructors are not permitted to excuse students from the scheduled time of the ﬁnal exam except in the cases of an Incomplete.

Rescheduling a Midterm
Contact Jim Fowler early in the quarter if you will not be able to take a midterm on the scheduled day; we likely can accomodate you, but we will need time to prepare.

Late Quizzes and Homework
You must stay caught up. It is tempting to fall behind, but diﬃcult to catch up again—this is true of all courses, but especially true of a course in mathematics. That said, I understand your schedules are busy, so I will not penalize you for infrequently turning in work a day or two late. Do not make a habit of it!

